The Sword-billed Hummingbird is the only bird with a bill longer than its body.
There are over 9,500 species of birds in the world. Scientists typically group them into 30 categories. Birds are the most widespread of all animals around the world.
Approximately 2/3 of all the bird species are found in tropical rain forests.
Hoatzin chicks have two claws on each wing. When they climb out of the nest, they use their claws to hold on to mangrove trees. They lose their claws once they mature, but they remain poor flyers.
The longest feathers ever seen were on a chicken in Japan. Its tail feathers measured 34.7 feet (10.59 m) long.
To make them more lightweight, most birds do not have bladders to store urine. Rather than producing liquid urine to get rid of wastes, they produce a white, pasty substance. However, while an ostrich does not have a bladder like a mammalian bladder, it is unique among birds because it does have a complete separation of feces and urine.
A bird’s lungs are much more complicated and efficient and take up more space than those of mammals, such as humans. A human’s lungs compose about 1/20 of its body, but a bird’s takes up 1/5.
The Australian pelican has the longest bill of any bird in the world. It is nearly 2 feet (0.5 m) in length. The sword-billed hummingbird, with its 3.9-inch (10 cm) bill, is the only bird with a bill that’s longer than its body.
Owls cannot swivel their eyes. Instead they move their heads completely around to see straight behind them. They live on every continent except Antarctica. Soft fringes on their wings make their flight essentially silent.
Famous birds include Ba in Egyptian mythology, Bar Juchne in the Talmud, The Cu Bird in Mexican folklore, the Firebird in Native American mythologies, Harpies in Greek mythology, the Phoenix in Egyptian mythology, Quetzalcoatl in Aztec mythology, and the Raven in Native American religions.
Famous birds include Ba in Egyptian mythology, Bar Juchne in the Talmud, The Cu Bird in Mexican folklore, the Firebird in Native American mythologies, Harpies in Greek mythology, the Phoenix in Egyptian mythology, Quetzalcoatl in Aztec mythology, and the Raven in Native American religions.
Famous birds in cartoons, comics, and films include Big Bird in Sesame Street, Buzz Buzzard in Woody Woodpecker, Disney’s Darkwing Duck, Footloops cereal’s Toucan Sam, Woodstock in the Peanuts comic strip, Woody Woodpecker, and Iago in Aladdin.
In the continental U.S. alone, between 1.4 billion and 3.7 billion birds are killed by cats annually.
The only bird with nostrils at the end of its beak is the kiwi. This placement helps it sniff for food, such as worms and insects on the ground. It often snorts to clear its nostrils.
Unlike most birds that sing, a woodpecker will drum its beak against a tree. Other woodpeckers can identify which bird it is by the sound of the drumming.
The most talkative bird in the world is the African gray parrot. One parrot could say over 800 words. Most species of parrots can learn only 50.
Many birds, such as starlings, sing notes too high for humans to hear.
The chicks of large bird species often take the longest to hatch. Emu chicks, for example, take 60 days to hatch. Small songbirds take just 2 weeks.
A green woodpecker can eat as many as 2,000 ants per day.
The Japanese crested ibis is one of the rarest birds in the world. Probably fewer than 50 crested ibises are alive today.
The 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska polluted approximately 1,180 miles of coastline and killed up to 100,000 seabirds.
The bird with the most feathers is the whistling swan, with up to 25,000 feathers. Hummingbirds, on the other hand, are so small that they have fewer than 1,000.
Falconry was developed more than 4,000 years ago in eastern and central Asia. Birds were used because they could kill animals beyond the range of a hunter’s weapon. Genghis Khan reportedly had 10,000 falconers.
Coalminers often used canaries to detect poisonous levels of carbon monoxide gas. Miners knew that if the canary passed out, they were in danger, too. The phrase “Canary in a Coalmine” derives from this history.
The marsh warbler can mimic more than 80 different birds. Other renowned mimics include mockingbirds and lyrebirds.
A pelican’s pouch-like beak can hold up to 2.5 gallons of water at a time. The beak will shrink to squeeze out the water before the pelican swallows its food.
A vulture named the Lammergeyer will fly with bones high in the air and then drop them onto rocks. It will then eat the smashed bones, like a circus sword swallower.
The bird that lays the smallest egg in the world is the bee hummingbird. Its egg is just under 0.5" x 0.25" and weighs a mere 0.02 oz.
Though it looks like a bird’s knee is bending backwards, what is bending backward is actually its ankle. Below its ankle is an extended foot bone, leading to the toes. A bird’s real knee is usually hidden by feathers.
The ostrich lays the biggest egg in the world. It measures 7" x 5" and weighs 3 pounds. However, the biggest egg for the size of the mother is laid by the kiwi and is a third of the weight of the bird. It is 5" long and can weigh as much as 1 lb. This would be the equivalent of an ostrich laying an 88 lb. (40 kg.) egg.
The Malleefowl is famed for making a huge compost pile for its nest. Its eggs are incubated by the heat given off by the rotting vegetation.
Social weaverbirds live in huge communal nests that look like a huge haystack spread across a treetop. Some nests can weigh a few tons, have over 400 birds living in them, and may be 100 years old.
The heaviest bird of prey is the Andean condor. It can weigh up to 27 lb. (12 kg.).
The most common wild bird in the world is the red-billed Quelea, with an estimated adult breeding population of 1.5 billion pairs. It mostly lives in sub-Saharan Africa and thousands of birds can be in a single flock. The most common nonwild bird is the chicken.
Many scientists believe that birds evolved from dinosaurs during the Mesozoic Era about 150 million years ago.
Flamingos pair for a lifetime. Some stay with their mates for 50 years or more.
In the United States alone, there are over 40 million pet birds.
A bird’s feathers weigh more than its skeleton.
The type of diet a bird eats in the wild is directly related to the shape of a bird’s beak.
While most male birds do not have a penis, the Argentine Lake Duck’s penis can extend 17", the longest of any bird known. The duck itself is only about 16 inches tall. The base of the penis is covered with coarse spines, and the tip is soft and brush-like, perhaps to clean sperm that may have been deposited in the female’s oviduct by another suitor. When not in use, the corkscrew shaped penis retracts into the duck’s abdomen.
Approximately 75% of wild birds live for less than a year. The larger the bird, the more likely it is to live longer. The large wandering albatross, for example, can live for up to 80 years.
Gentoo Penguins are the fastest swimming birds, reaching speeds of 22 mph (36 kph). Emperor Penguins can stay under water for up to 18 minutes.
Arctic terns have the longest annual migration of any bird. They fly 25,000 miles (40,000 m) from the Arctic to the Antarctic and then back again.
The bird with the greatest wingspan of any other bird is the Wandering Albatross at up to 11.8 ft (3.63 m).
Bar-headed Geese fly across the Himalayas, the highest mountains in the world. They fly nearly 5 miles (over 8,000 m) up in the sky, almost as high as jet planes. The highest-flying bird is the Griffon Vulture. In 1973, one collided with an airplane more than 6.8 miles above the Ivory Coast in Africa.
The largest, tallest, and heaviest bird in the world is the ostrich. Male ostriches can reach up to 9 ft. tall (2.7 m) and weigh up to 350 lb. (160 kg). Their eyes are bigger than any other land animals' eyes and are even larger than their brain.
The song of a European wren is made of more than 700 different notes a minute and can be heard 1,650 feet (500 m) away.
The ostrich is the only bird that willingly takes care of other females’ eggs.
Ostriches do not bury their heads in the sand when danger is near. But they have been seen to lie on the ground with their long neck stretched out flat if they want to hide.
The biggest bird that ever existed on Earth is the flightless elephant bird, which is now extinct. It weighed about 1000 lb. (450 kg.). Seven ostrich eggs would fit inside one elephant bird’s egg. Elephant birds died out 400 years ago, but people still find pieces of their tough-shelled eggs.
The Emperor Penguin is the only bird that lays its eggs in the middle of winter. By laying its eggs so early, it gives its young a head start. The babies need all spring, summer, and fall to grow big enough to survive the next winter.
Oilbirds eat oil palm fruits, which make the birds oily too. People near the caves where the oilbirds lived used to trap the oilbirds and boil them down for the oil.
The fastest flying bird in a dive is the Peregrine Falcon. It averages speeds of over 110 mph (180 kph).
Oilbirds are the only birds that use echolocation the way that bats do. However, bats are much better at it. A bat can even fly through the blades of a moving fan. Oilbirds are also the only nocturnal fruit-eating birds in the world.
Birds have three fingers on each wing. The first, the thumb, supports a small part of the wing called the alula (a.k.a bastard wing). The second and third fingers support the main flight feathers.
Birds typically have two, three, or four toes. A typical perching bird has three pointing forward, and one back. Birds that run on hard ground have only three, all pointing forward. Ostriches only have two toes, which are shaped like the hoof of an antelope.
The Sooty Tern spends more time in the air than any other bird. It takes off over the ocean and flies for at least 3 years without settling on water or land. Swifts also spend most of their lives in the air. They can even sleep in the air by gliding on air currents with their wings outstretched.
Birds don’t fall off of a branch when they sleep because their toes automatically clench around the twig they are standing on. Because the grabbing action is done by tendons rather than muscles, the birds can sleep without danger of falling.
The wishbone (or “merrythought” bone) is a bird’s fused collarbone. The strongest fliers have the widest angles in their wishbones. They are the only vertebrate animals to have a fused collarbone.
Not all birds have equally hollow bones. Those that dive into water—like gannets, terns, and kingfishers—and those that fly very fast, like swifts, have less air in their long bones than other birds.
The linear flight formations of migratory birds are called echelons, with the most common shapes being the “V” or the “J.” In fact, a true V-shaped formation is less common than a J formation. Birds fly in formation a) because it saves energy and b) to facilitate orientation and communication among the birds.
The word "parakeet" literally means "long tail."
An albatross can soar for as long as six hours without moving its wings.
The heaviest bird in the air is the Kori Bustard, from East and South Africa. It weighs about 31 lb. (14 kg.), with the largest on recorded being 40 lb. (18 kg.). Because it is such hard work to fly, it flies only in emergencies and for only short distances.
A Ruby-throated Hummingbird, which weighs less than 0.2 oz., has to beat its wings more than 52 times a second to hover in front of a flower.
What keeps a bird up in the air is the shape of its wings. The first humans to discover how birds stay aloft were Australian Aborigines when they invented the boomerang.
The fastest level flight by a bird has been seen in both the Spine-tailed Swift and the Red-breasted Merganser (a duck). They have flown at 100 mph (161 kph) in level flight.
The slowest flying bird is the American Woodcock. It can fly at just 5 mph (8 kph). When hummingbirds hover, they move at 0 mph. Additionally, hummingbirds are the only birds that can fly backwards under power, registering a negative speed.
The Rufous hummingbird is the smallest migrant bird. It is less than 4 in. (9 cm) long and flies every year from Alaska to Mexico, a round trip of 3,800 miles (6,400 km).
Lighthouses are dangerous for birds. The beams attract birds, especially in misty conditions, and many are killed when they fly into the glass.
Birds sense winter is coming by 1) changes in hormones that cause them to put on fat, 2) the changing length of the day, and 3) sensing small changes in air pressure, which is important in predicting weather changes.
Crows can recognize and remember human faces, particularly faces they associate with bad experiences. They can even share their grudge against a specific person with other crows.
A group of crows is called a murder or congress. A group of owls is called a parliament, wisdom, or study. A group of flamingos is called a flamboyance.
The Bald Eagle builds the largest tree nest of all birds, measuring about 9.5 ft. (2.9 m) across. The largest nest ever found was nearly 10 ft. wide and weighed close to 3 tons.
Woodcocks and many ducks have their eyes placed at the sides of their heads so that they have a 360-degree field of vision.
A special arrangement of blood vessels cools the blood going out to the feet and warms the blood coming back, so even when standing on the ice, birds don’t lose too much heat.
Both the Bee and the Vervain Hummingbirds build the smallest nests of all birds, measuring 3/4" across and 1.2" deep.
The most dangerous bird in the world is the Cassowary. With one kick it can kill its enemy.
Birds that are raised for meat and eggs (poultry) are the largest source of protein eaten by humans.
To attract a mate, a male Frigate bird will blow up its red throat pouch. The pouch can be as big as a person’s head.
Over time, a surprising number of birds have lost their ability to fly. Being flightless has several advantages. For example, a flightless bird doesn’t need to develop and carry large flight muscles or burn up the energy that flying requires. A flightless bird can also get by with less food, which means it can survive in places where food is scarce.
Depending on the species, a woodpecker’s tongue can be up to 4" long. It stores this long tongue by curling it in and sticking it through a specialized opening at the back of its neck, where it can then put it between the skull and skin.
The seagulls in the Alfred Hitchcock movie The Birds (1963) were fed a mixture of wheat and whisky so they would stand around and not fly too much.
The Fieldfare birds have a special way to attack an enemy bird. They gang up on it and make it fly to the ground. Then the Fieldfares fly into the air and drop poop on the bird.
In the movie The Birds (1963), the scene where actress Tippi Hedren is attacked took a week to shoot. The birds were attached to her clothes by long nylon threads so they could not fly away.
Birds play a central role in many creation myths. Birds are also often associated with the journey of the soul after death or as mediators between the dead and living. They can also appear as oracles or tricksters.
The game Angry Birds has sold more than 7 million copies on Apple’s iPhone. The game was made by a team of just four people. It was such a low priority for the company that it took over 8 months to finish.
Wind farms kill approximately a half-million birds per year in the United States, according to a 2008 Fish and Wildlife study. Nearly 10,000 birds, almost all of which are protected by the migratory bird acts, are killed every year at the wind farm in Altamont Pass, CA, alone.
Approximately 200 people have died since 1988 because of airborne collision between airplanes and birds. Bird strikes cause $300 million of damage each year to aircraft. The first recorded bird strike was in 1905, when Orville Wright’s plane hit a bird and killed it.
In the novel To Kill a Mockingbird (1960), author Harper Lee used the mockingbird to symbolize innocence.
The smallest flightless bird is the Island Rail. This tiny bird lives on the remote island of Tristan da Cunha in the Atlantic Ocean and is just 5" long, about the same size as a hen chick.
The earliest known bird is the Archaeopteryx. It lived during the Jurassic period 150 million years ago. Because it did not have the basic features of flight, scientists are uncertain if it could fly.
Vultures have stomach acid so corrosive that they can digest carcasses infected with anthrax.
No other living being other than birds have feathers. The main function is to help them fly. They also waterproof birds and protect them from UV rays and other harmful elements.
Only one mammal can fly: the bat However, it flies differently from the bird. Insects also do not fly the same as birds.
A Bald Eagle is called “bald” because it is piebald (black and white), not because it doesn’t have any feathers.
Eleven percent of the world’s bird species is endangered. Draining wetlands and felling forests are the main causes of damage, but pollution and pesticides also play a part.
Before 1840, there were thousands of millions of passenger pigeons in North America. However, they were slaughtered for food until only one was left, a female called Martha. She died when she was 12 years old in 1914, in a zoo in Ohio.
More than 150 kinds of birds have become extinct since 1600, though many more may have died out that scientists don’t know about. It wasn’t just European explorers that killed bird species. Archeology shows that when people first arrived in ancient times in Hawaii and on islands in the South Pacific and Caribbean, they killed many birds Europeans had never seen before.
The word "swan" is derived from the Indo-European root *swen, meaning "to sound, to sing."
Someone who suffers from "anatidaephobia" believes that somewhere, somehow a duck or goose is constantly watching them. The word "anatidaephobia" is  from Greek word anatidae, which means ducks, geese or other water fowls, and phobos is Greek for fear.
There are more fake flamingos on Earth than real ones.
Though the term “eagle eyed” implies that eagles have keen vision, only the Wedge-tailed Eagle can see better than humans (2½ times better). Kestrels and falcons have about the same power of sight as we do.
The word "falcon" is from the Latin "falx," meaning "curved blade, pruning hook, sickle, war-scythe."
A flock of ravens is called an “unkindness” or a "conspiracy."
Esmeraldas Woodstar is one of the world's rarest and smallest hummingbirds, measuring barely 2½ inches long. It was thought to be extinct until it was rediscovered in 1990 after not being sighted since 1912.
About two-thirds of birds in North America are at risk of extinction due to climate change.
Although coyotes resemble wolves, they are two completely different species.
Coyotes are often seen as pests, but they actually help control the population of rodents and other problematic animals.
Within both urban and rural coyote populations, coyote parents work together to raise their pups, which helps increase survival rates.
Coyotes can breed with both wolves and dogs. For example, a type of coyote hybrid named the eastern coyotes contain genes of both wolves and dogs and are known as "coywolves" and "coydogs."
Coyotes are great swimmers, which has helped them colonize islands and spread their populations.
A rare population of "snow coyotes" lives in Newfoundland. They are unique because they have genes that turn their coats snow white. Scientists believe that the gene mutation occured when a coyote mated with a golden retriever.
Coyotes are monogamous and mate for a lifetime.
Western Canadians tend to pronounce "coyote" as "ky-ote," while those from Ontario rhyme it with "Wile E."
Coyotes can run up to 43 miles per hour (69 km per hour). The top speed of a human is 28 mph (45 km per hour).
Coyotes eat pretty much anything they can find, including rabbits, rodents, birds, fish, frogs, deer, fruit, grass, and carrion.
Some Native American tribes, such as the Chinook, Maidu, Paiute, Pawne, and Ute, portray the coyote as the companion of the Creator.
Even though they have been hunted and trapped for over 200 years, there are more coyotes today than when the U.S. Constitution was signed.
The coyote is also known as Medicine Dog, Brother, Old Man Coyote, and Little Wolf.
The mythology of Native Americans in the Pacific Northwest tells how the coyote put salmon in the rivers and taught humans how to make fish traps and salmon spears.
The scientific name for "coyote" is Canis latrans, which means "barking dog."
A human has about 5 million olfactory receptors in their nose. Scientists estimate a coyote has about 300 million olfactory receptors.
Coyotes sometimes walk on their toes to make as little noise as possible.
The coyote is also known as the American jackal.
Low desert and valley coyotes weigh much less than those living in mountainous terrain, weighing in at about 20 pounds. In contrast, mountain coyotes can reach up to 50 pounds.
The coyote is one of the most adaptable animals in the world. They can change breeding habits, diets, and social dynamics to survive in a wide variety of habitats.
Only 20% of coyote pups survive their first year.
The coyote is listed as "least concern" by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, because the coyote is distributed widely and abundantly.
As of 2005, scientists have recognized 19 coyote subspecies.
The greatest threat to coyotes are humans, followed by cougars and gray wolves.
In Mesoamerican mythology, the coyote is seen as a symbol of military might. However, after the European colonization of the Americas, it was seen as cowardly and untrustworthy.
DNA studies show that most North American wolves have coyote DNA.
Coyotes can jump a distance of over 13 feet (4 meters).
The largest coyote on record was a male killed in Afton, Wyoming, in 1937. He measured 4 ft 11 in (1.5m) from nose to tail, and he weighed 75 lb (34 kg).
Coyotes living at higher elevations usually have more black and gray shades in their coats than desert-dwelling coyotes.
Naturalist Thomas Say first described the coyote scientifically in September 1819. He was also the first to describe the differences between a wolf and a coyote.
Coyote attacks on humans are rare and usually do not cause serious injuries. Attacks, however, have increased, especially in California.
There have been only two confirmed fatal coyote attacks on humans. Three-year-old Keely Keen was killed by a coyote in Glendale, California; 19-year-old Taylor Mitchell was killed in Canada.
Coyotes kill more livestock in western North America than any other predator.
Unlike dogs, cats do not have a sweet tooth. Scientists believe this is due to a mutation in a key taste receptor.
When a cat chases its prey, it keeps its head level. Dogs and humans bob their heads up and down.
The technical term for a cat’s hairball is a “bezoar.”
A group of cats is called a “clowder.”
A cat can’t climb head first down a tree because every claw on a cat’s paw points the same way. To get down from a tree, a cat must back down.
Cats make about 100 different sounds. Dogs make only about 10.
Every year, nearly four million cats are eaten in Asia.
There are more than 500 million domestic cats in the world, with approximately 40 recognized breeds.
Approximately 24 cat skins can make a coat.
While it is commonly thought that the ancient Egyptians were the first to domesticate cats, the oldest known pet cat was recently found in a 9,500-year-old grave on the Mediterranean island of Cyprus. This grave predates early Egyptian art depicting cats by 4,000 years or more.
During the time of the Spanish Inquisition, Pope Innocent VIII condemned cats as evil and thousands of cats were burned. Unfortunately, the widespread killing of cats led to an explosion of the rat population, which exacerbated the effects of the Black Death.
During the Middle Ages, cats were associated with withcraft, and on St. John’s Day, people all over Europe would stuff them into sacks and toss the cats into bonfires. On holy days, people celebrated by tossing cats from church towers.
The first cat in space was a French cat named Felicette (a.k.a. “Astrocat”) In 1963, France blasted the cat into outer space. Electrodes implanted in her brains sent neurological signals back to Earth. She survived the trip.
The group of words associated with cat (catt, cath, chat, katze) stem from the Latin catus, meaning domestic cat, as opposed to feles, or wild cat.
The term “puss” is the root of the principal word for “cat” in the Romanian term pisica and the root of secondary words in Lithuanian (puz) and Low German puus. Some scholars suggest that “puss” could be imitative of the hissing sound used to get a cat’s attention. As a slang word for the female pudenda, it could be associated with the connotation of a cat being soft, warm, and fuzzy.
Approximately 40,000 people are bitten by cats in the U.S. annually.
Cats are North America’s most popular pets: there are 73 million cats compared to 63 million dogs. Over 30% of households in North America own a cat.
According to Hebrew legend, Noah prayed to God for help protecting all the food he stored on the ark from being eaten by rats. In reply, God made the lion sneeze, and out popped a cat.
A cat’s hearing is better than a dog’s. And a cat can hear high-frequency sounds up to two octaves higher than a human.
A cat can travel at a top speed of approximately 31 mph (49 km) over a short distance.
A cat rubs against people not only to be affectionate but also to mark out its territory with scent glands around its face. The tail area and paws also carry the cat’s scent.
Researchers are unsure exactly how a cat purrs. Most veterinarians believe that a cat purrs by vibrating vocal folds deep in the throat. To do this, a muscle in the larynx opens and closes the air passage about 25 times per second.
When a family cat died in ancient Egypt, family members would mourn by shaving off their eyebrows. They also held elaborate funerals during which they drank wine and beat their breasts. The cat was embalmed with a sculpted wooden mask and the tiny mummy was placed in the family tomb or in a pet cemetery with tiny mummies of mice.
In 1888, more than 300,000 mummified cats were found an Egyptian cemetery. They were stripped of their wrappings and carted off to be used by farmers in England and the U.S. for fertilizer.
Most cats give birth to a litter of between one and nine kittens. The largest known litter ever produced was 19 kittens, of which 15 survived.
Smuggling a cat out of ancient Egypt was punishable by death. Phoenician traders eventually succeeded in smuggling felines, which they sold to rich people in Athens and other important cities.
The earliest ancestor of the modern cat lived about 30 million years ago. Scientists called it the Proailurus, which means “first cat” in Greek. The group of animals that pet cats belong to emerged around 12 million years ago.
The biggest wildcat today is the Siberian Tiger. It can be more than 12 feet (3.6 m) long (about the size of a small car) and weigh up to 700 pounds (317 kg).
A cat’s brain is biologically more similar to a human brain than it is to a dog’s. Both humans and cats have identical regions in their brains that are responsible for emotions.
Many Egyptians worshipped the goddess Bast, who had a woman’s body and a cat’s head.
Mohammed loved cats and reportedly his favorite cat, Muezza, was a tabby. Legend says that tabby cats have an “M” for Mohammed on top of their heads because Mohammad would often rest his hand on the cat’s head.
While many parts of Europe and North America consider the black cat a sign of bad luck, in Britain and Australia, black cats are considered lucky.
The most popular pedigreed cat is the Persian cat, followed by the Main Coon cat and the Siamese cat.
The smallest pedigreed cat is a Singapura, which can weigh just 4 lbs (1.8 kg), or about five large cans of cat food. The largest pedigreed cats are Maine Coon cats, which can weigh 25 lbs (11.3 kg), or nearly twice as much as an average cat weighs.
Some cats have survived falls of over 65 feet (20 meters), due largely to their “righting reflex.” The eyes and balance organs in the inner ear tell it where it is in space so the cat can land on its feet. Even cats without a tail have this ability.
Some Siamese cats appear cross-eyed because the nerves from the left side of the brain go to mostly the right eye and the nerves from the right side of the brain go mostly to the left eye. This causes some double vision, which the cat tries to correct by “crossing” its eyes.
Researchers believe the word “tabby” comes from Attabiyah, a neighborhood in Baghdad, Iraq. Tabbies got their name because their striped coats resembled the famous wavy patterns in the silk produced in this city.
A cat can jump up to five times its own height in a single bound.
Cats hate the water because their fur does not insulate well when it’s wet. The Turkish Van, however, is one cat that likes swimming. Bred in central Asia, its coat has a unique texture that makes it water resistant.
The Egyptian Mau is probably the oldest breed of cat. In fact, the breed is so ancient that its name is the Egyptian word for “cat.”
The first commercially cloned pet was a cat named "Little Nicky." He cost his owner $50,000, making him one of the most expensive cats ever.
A cat usually has about 12 whiskers on each side of its face.
A cat’s eyesight is both better and worse than humans. It is better because cats can see in much dimmer light and they have a wider peripheral view. It’s worse because they don’t see color as well as humans do. Scientists believe grass appears red to cats.
Spanish-Jewish folklore recounts that Adam’s first wife, Lilith, became a black vampire cat, sucking the blood from sleeping babies. This may be the root of the superstition that a cat will smother a sleeping baby or suck out the child’s breath.
Perhaps the most famous comic cat is the Cheshire Cat in Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland. With the ability to disappear, this mysterious character embodies the magic and sorcery historically associated with cats.
The smallest wildcat today is the Black-footed cat. The females are less than 20 inches (50 cm) long and can weigh as little as 2.5 lbs (1.2 kg).
On average, cats spend 2/3 of every day sleeping. That means a nine-year-old cat has been awake for only three years of its life.
In the original Italian version of Cinderella, the benevolent fairy godmother figure was a cat.
The little tufts of hair in a cat’s ear that help keep out dirt direct sounds into the ear, and insulate the ears are called “ear furnishings.”
The ability of a cat to find its way home is called “psi-traveling.” Experts think cats either use the angle of the sunlight to find their way or that cats have magnetized cells in their brains that act as compasses.
Isaac Newton invented the cat flap. Newton was experimenting in a pitch-black room. Spithead, one of his cats, kept opening the door and wrecking his experiment. The cat flap kept both Newton and Spithead happy.
The world’s rarest coffee, Kopi Luwak, comes from Indonesia where a wildcat known as the luwak lives. The cat eats coffee berries and the coffee beans inside pass through the stomach. The beans are harvested from the cat’s dung heaps and then cleaned and roasted. Kopi Luwak sells for about $500 for a 450 g (1 lb) bag.
A cat’s jaw can’t move sideways, so a cat can’t chew large chunks of food.
Cats don't actually meow at each other, just at humans. Cats typically will spit, purr, and hiss at other cats.
Female cats tend to be right pawed, while male cats are more often left pawed. Interestingly, while 90% of humans are right handed, the remaining 10% of lefties also tend to be male.
A cat’s back is extremely flexible because it has up to 53 loosely fitting vertebrae. Humans only have 34.
All cats have claws, and all except the cheetah sheath them when at rest.
Two members of the cat family are distinct from all others: the clouded leopard and the cheetah. The clouded leopard does not roar like other big cats, nor does it groom or rest like small cats. The cheetah is unique because it is a running cat; all others are leaping cats. They are leaping cats because they slowly stalk their prey and then leap on it.
A cat lover is called an Ailurophilia (Greek: cat+lover).
In Japan, cats are thought to have the power to turn into super spirits when they die. This may be because according to the Buddhist religion, the body of the cat is the temporary resting place of very spiritual people.
Most cats had short hair until about 100 years ago, when it became fashionable to own cats and experiment with breeding.
One reason that kittens sleep so much is because a growth hormone is released only during sleep.
Cats have about 130,000 hairs per square inch (20,155 hairs per square centimeter).
The heaviest cat on record is Himmy, a Tabby from Queensland, Australia. He weighed nearly 47 pounds (21 kg). He died at the age of 10.
The oldest cat on record was Crème Puff from Austin, Texas, who lived from 1967 to August 6, 2005, three days after her 38th birthday. A cat typically can live up to 20 years, which is equivalent to about 96 human years.
The lightest cat on record is a blue point Himalayan called Tinker Toy, who weighed 1 pound, 6 ounces (616 g). Tinker Toy was 2.75 inches (7 cm) tall and 7.5 inches (19 cm) long.
Approximately 1/3 of cat owners think their pets are able to read their minds.
The tiniest cat on record is Mr. Pebbles, a 2-year-old cat that weighed 3 lbs (1.3 k) and was 6.1 inches (15.5 cm) high.
A commemorative tower was built in Scotland for a cat named Towser, who caught nearly 30,000 mice in her lifetime.
In the 1750s, Europeans introduced cats into the Americas to control pests.
The first cat show was organized in 1871 in London. Cat shows later became a worldwide craze.
The first cartoon cat was Felix the Cat in 1919. In 1940, Tom and Jerry starred in the first theatrical cartoon “Puss Gets the Boot.” In 1981 Andrew Lloyd Weber created the musical Cats, based on T.S. Eliot’s Old Possum’s Book of Practical Cats.
The normal body temperature of a cat is between 100.5 ° and 102.5 °F. A cat is sick if its temperature goes below 100 ° or above 103 °F.
A cat has 230 bones in its body. A human has 206. A cat has no collarbone, so it can fit through any opening the size of its head.
Cats have 32 muscles that control the outer ear (humans have only 6). A cat can independently rotate its ears 180 degrees.
A cat’s nose pad is ridged with a unique pattern, just like the fingerprint of a human.
If they have ample water, cats can tolerate temperatures up to 133 °F.
Foods that should not be given to cats include onions, garlic, green tomatoes, raw potatoes, chocolate, grapes, and raisins. Though milk is not toxic, it can cause an upset stomach and gas. Tylenol and aspirin are extremely toxic to cats, as are many common houseplants. Feeding cats dog food or canned tuna that’s for human consumption can cause malnutrition.
A 2007 Gallup poll revealed that both men and women were equally likely to own a cat.
A cat’s heart beats nearly twice as fast as a human heart, at 110 to 140 beats a minute.
In just seven years, a single pair of cats and their offspring could produce a staggering total of 420,000 kittens.
Relative to its body size, the clouded leopard has the biggest canines of all animals’ canines. Its dagger-like teeth can be as long as 1.8 inches (4.5 cm).
Cats spend nearly 1/3 of their waking hours cleaning themselves.
Grown cats have 30 teeth. Kittens have about 26 temporary teeth, which they lose when they are about 6 months old.
Cats don’t have sweat glands over their bodies like humans do. Instead, they sweat only through their paws.
A cat called Dusty has the known record for the most kittens. She had more than 420 kittens in her lifetime.
The largest cat breed is the Ragdoll. Male Ragdolls weigh between 12 and 20 lbs (5.4-9.0 k). Females weigh between 10 and 15 lbs (4.5-6.8 k).
Cats are extremely sensitive to vibrations. Cats are said to detect earthquake tremors 10 or 15 minutes before humans can.
In contrast to dogs, cats have not undergone major changes during their domestication process.
A female cat is called a queen or a molly.
In the 1930s, two Russian biologists discovered that color change in Siamese kittens depend on their body temperature. Siamese cats carry albino genes that work only when the body temperature is above 98° F. If these kittens are left in a very warm room, their points won’t darken and they will stay a creamy white.
There are up to 60 million feral cats in the United States alone.
The oldest cat to give birth was Kitty who, at the age of 30, gave birth to two kittens. During her life, she gave birth to 218 kittens.
The most traveled cat is Hamlet, who escaped from his carrier while on a flight. He hid for seven weeks behind a panel on the airplane. By the time he was discovered, he had traveled nearly 373,000 miles (600,000 km).
In Holland’s embassy in Moscow, Russia, the staff noticed that the two Siamese cats kept meowing and clawing at the walls of the building. Their owners finally investigated, thinking they would find mice. Instead, they discovered microphones hidden by Russian spies. The cats heard the microphones when they turned on.
The most expensive cat was an Asian Leopard cat (ALC)-Domestic Shorthair (DSH) hybrid named Zeus. Zeus, who is 90% ALC and 10% DSH, has an asking price of £100,000 ($154,000).
The cat who holds the record for the longest non-fatal fall is Andy. He fell from the 16th floor of an apartment building (about 200 ft/.06 km) and survived.
Rome has more homeless cats per square mile than any other city in the world.
The richest cat is Blackie who was left £15 million by his owner, Ben Rea.
The claws on the cat’s back paws aren’t as sharp as the claws on the front paws because the claws in the back don’t retract and, consequently, become worn.
Cats can drink seawater.
There is a show in Iceland called "Keeping Up With the Kattarshians." It's a cat reality show that features 4 kittens who live together in fully-furnished "cat" house, Big Brother-style.
Researchers say your cat *does* know her name. She just doesn't care.
The Hungarian word for "quotation marks" is "macskaköröm," which literally translates to "cat claws."
Koalas began to evolve almost 45 million years ago, right around the time Australia detached from Antartica and began to move north.
Koalas are only found in Australia.
The Aborigines, the indigenous people who lived on the island of Australia for thousands of years before the English arrived, had many names for the Koala bear, including “cullewine,” “koolewong,” and “kobarcola.”
Aboriginal people ate koalas, but they also used them in many of their myths and legends.
“Koala” means “no water” in one Australian tribe’s language.
John Price, an English explorer, first made note of the koala in 1798, which helped make the little animal famous in the coming years.
With the arrival of English settlers to Australia, koalas began to be hunted and killed for their pelts, which were used as currency in the new colonies.
During the 1920s, millions of koalas were killed for sport and for trading, causing the animal to almost become extinct.
The Australian Government declared koalas a “protected species” in the late 1930s.
Currently, koalas are listed as a “vulnerable” species, with anywhere between 43,000 and 80,000 koalas left in the wild.
The scientific name of the koala is phascularctos cinereus, from the Greek word phaskolos, meaning “pouch,” and arktos, meaning “bear.”
Even though the koala is often called a “bear,” it’s actually a marsupial, an animal with a pouch on its stomach that holds young inside until they are old enough to brave the outside world.
Koalas sleep for up to 18 hours a day.
Koalas are nocturnal.
Koalas are closely related to kangaroos and wombats.
Koala fur is coarse, like wool, and helps keep them dry.
Koalas eat only eucalyptus leaves and spend most of their lives on the branches of these trees.
Koalas have a very good sense of smell and very poor eyesight, which forces them to rely on their ears rather than their eyes to avoid predators and move from tree to tree.
The only time koalas leave their tree is to find another tree with more leaves to eat.
Koalas need about 100 trees each in order to survive, which means that even though they aren’t being  hunted as they once were, their population is decreasing as the forests that make up their homes disappear.
Fourteen football-fields' worth of the koalas' tree-filled habitats are destroyed every day.
While eucalyptus leaves are poisonous to almost every other animal, koalas can subsist on them as a singular diet because of their digestive tract, which produces bacteria to break down the poison while they sleep.
Deforestation could cause koala extinction in certain regions of Australia as early as 2050 if the current rate continues.
Koalas smell like the oil in eucalyptus leaves because they eat so many.
Koalas do not drink very much water; instead, they get moisture from the leaves of the eucalyptus.
Koalas are herbivores.
Currently, the primary animal predators of koalas are domestic dogs.
Koalas have fingerprints and are the only mammal, apart from humans and chimpanzees, to have them.
Koalas are generally solitary—male and female koalas only meet to mate.
Koalas are pregnant for a little over a month.
Koala mothers only have one baby at a time.
A baby koala is called a joey.
Koalas grow to their full size by the time they are 4 years old.
Koalas live for 10–15 years.
In recent years, koala populations have been infected with chlamydia, a sexually transmitted disease usually found in humans.
Some koala populations have had chlamydia infection rates as high as 100%.
Scientists are working to cure chlamydia outbreaks in koalas—a difficult task since antibiotics can prevent cultivation of gut bacteria needed to break down the poison in eucalyptus leaves.
Tigers are the largest cats on Earth. They can weigh up to 720 pounds (363 kg) and stretch 6 feet (2 meters) long. While not quite as tall as a male lion, a male tiger is heavier and longer.
The Siberian tiger is the biggest of all tigers.
The tiger is the national animal of both India and Bangladesh.
The stripes on the forehead of a tiger can look like the Chinese character that means "king."
A tiger's back legs are longer than its front legs, which makes it a running, jumping, and pouncing machine.
Tigers have over 100 stripes, which helps the tiger blend in with long grass. Like fingerprints, no two tigers have the same pattern.
Less than 100 years ago, tigers roamed over much of Central, South, and Southeast Asia and were even found in Turkey. Now, they are found only in parts of South and Southeast Asia, and some pockets in Eastern Russia and China.
A group of tigers is called a streak or an ambush.
The Bengal (or Indian) tiger is the best-known of all tigers. Shere Khan in the movie The Jungle Book is a Bengal tiger.
A tiger's upper canine is about 4 inches (10 cm) long, which is about the size of a man's finger.
A tiger can eat nearly 1/5 of its body weight in one meal—about 88 pounds (40 kg). In one year, an adult male tiger can eat up to 8,000 pounds of meat.
A Siberian tiger has almost 20,000 hairs per square inch, or about 3,000 hairs in a single sq. cm of skin.
While the tiger is an expert hunter, only one in every 20 hunts ends in a kill. In areas where prey is scarce, even fewer hunts are successful.
The Sundarbans swamp forest on the border of India and Bangladesh is the tiger-attack capital of the world. Approximately 600 Bengal tigers live there, and they kill up to 100 people each year.
Nearly 50% of tiger cubs die before they reach one year old, often because their mothers have been shot.
A tiger's roar can be heard over 2 miles (3 km) through a forest.
Tigers have killed more people than either lions or leopards. During the 19th century, tigers may have killed hundreds of thousands of people.
In 1960, over 4,000 South China tigers lived in China. Today, there are fewer than 20 left in the wild and just 60 in zoos.  They were hunted to near extinction because the government declared they were pests.
A tiger can kill instantly with a single bite to the neck through the spinal cord. A tiger can also suffocate its prey by squeezing its throat for up to 10 minutes.
A tiger's claws can grow up to 4.7 inches (12 cm) long.
The Sumatran tiger is the smallest tiger. A male weighs about 265 pounds (120 kg), which is about the same as a female lion.
A captive tiger can live up to 20 years. Wild tigers live between 10 and 15 years.
Scientists believe that the white spots behind the ears of a tiger help tiger cubs follow their mothers through the shady forest. The white spot is called an "ocelli."
The Siberian tiger has fewer stripes than the Bengal tiger, and its stripes are brown rather than black.
There are almost as many tigers living in zoos and wildlife parks as there are in the wild.
Despite conservation efforts, the Siberian tiger could become extinct in the wild in the next ten years.
The Latin name for the tiger is Panthera tigris. The word Panthera is from the Greek word meaning "hunter," while tigris is an Old Persian word meaning "fast" or "arrow-like."
A fully-grown tiger can leap over 9 yards (8 m) and  jump up to 5 yards vertically (5 m).
A tiger spends about 18 hours a day sleeping.
A tiger's paw print is called a "pug mark."
The South China tiger has the fewest stripes, while the Sumatran tiger has the most.
Tigers don't only have striped fur, they also have striped skin.
A tiger's tongue is so rough that it can scrape the meat off its prey.
A tiger's saliva is an antiseptic. It is useful for cleaning their wounds.
A tiger's night vision is 6 times better than a human's.
During the 1930s, a female Bengal tiger named Champawat killed over 400 people, making her one of the most well-known man-eating tigers in history.
A tiger's tail helps it balance while its running. Its tail can be up to one-third of its body length.
Because tigers usually attack their prey from the side or rear, some people living in rural india wear masks on the back of their heads.
One hundred years ago, there were eight different subspecies of tiger. Today, three of those subspecies are extinct and others are dangerously close to being wiped off the earth forever.
According to ancient Chinese belief, a tiger's body parts have magical powers to cure disease. Tiger bones supposedly cure weakness; whiskers are used for toothaches; and tiger tails are used for skin diseases.  These long-held beliefs fuel catastrophic tiger poaching.
Bengal tigers are the least endangered of the tigers, with approximately 2,000 left in the world.
White Bengal tigers are most likely extinct in the wild, but they still live in zoos. All captive white tigers can be traced to one wild white tiger named Mohan, who was captured in India in 1951.
Over the past one hundred years, over 95% of the tiger population has disappeared, leaving just 5,000 tigers in the world today.  Their population is still decreasing due to poaching and habitat loss.
The earliest tiger fossils are 2 million years old.
Unlike other cats, tigers like to be near water. The Sumatran tiger has webbed feet, which makes it an especially skilled swimmer.
Black (melanistic) tigers exist, though none live in captivity.
Contrary to popular belief, tigers do not live in Africa.
Tigers are called "hypercarnivores," which means they live exclusively on meat. Tigers eat cows, birds, monkeys, lizards, crocodiles, and even small elephants. Their digestive systems simply cannot digest fruit, plants, or insects.
Tigers can run as fast as 35 mph, but only for short distances. Most of their prey can outrun them, espeically deer and antelope.
Just 100 years ago, over 40,000 Bengal tigers roamed India's forests, but now there are less than 1,400. Poaching and loss of habitat are their primary threats.
Throughout the world, the tiger has been a symbol of power and a fighting spirit.
After a poacher injured a tiger and stole part of the tiger's kill, the tiger staked out the poacher's cabin, destroyed anything with the poacher's scent on it, and waited for the front door for the poacher to come home. When the poacher finally arrived, the tiger killed and ate him.
Each tiger has its own scent due to individualized scent glands.
On the black market, a dead adult tiger can sell for over $10,000.
Tigers, like all cats, cannot taste anything sweet.
Tigers cannot purr. When they are happy or feel safe, they squint or close their eyes.
Tigers have the largest brain of any carnivore, except the polar bear.
Because of their immense size, tigers can starve to death within two to three weeks. It takes about 30–40 days for a human to starve to death.
The Bali tiger was purposely hunted to extinction in Bali because it was viewed as evil. The Javan tiger and Caspian tigers were also hunted to extinction.
Domestic cats share about 95.6% of their DNA with tigers, from which they diverged on the evolutionary tree approximately 10.8 million years ago.
Due to their rough tongue bristles, tigers do not lap up water like many other animals. Instead, they cup the back of their tongue to flick water droplets into their mouths.
Unlike lions, who will fight to the death over a kill, tigers often share meals and take turns eating.
Tasmanian tigers are not big cats. They are marsupials.
Modern tigers did not descend from prehistoric saber-tooth tigers. In fact, the two are not closely related.
Monkeys can understand written numbers and can even count. They can also understand basic parts of arithmetic and even, in rare cases, multiplication.
To attract a female partner, male capuchin monkeys will urinate in their hands and then rub it thoroughly into their fur.
The origins of the word "monkey" are unclear. It appears also to be related to manikin, from the Dutch manneken ("little man"). It could also be derived from the name of a popular medieval beast story  in which the son of an ape is named "Moneke."
A Colombian woman claimed that she was raised by a colony of capuchin monkeys after being kidnapped and abandoned in the jungle when she was just 4 years old.
Raw and cooked brain of dead monkey is widely consumed in China and Malaysia.
Scientists observed female monkeys teaching their young how to floss their teeth.
The smallest monkey in the world is the pygmy marmoset, with a body as little as 5 inches (12 cm) and a tail length of about 7 inches (17 cm). As a comparison, they are about the size of a hamster, can fit in the palm of a human hand, and they weigh the same as a pack of cards.
The most recently discovered monkey is the lesula monkey. It was discovered in 2007 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in Africa.
Diseases that can spread from monkey to humans include Ebola Reston, B virus (Cercopithecine herpesvirus 1), monkey pox, yellow fever, simian immunodeficiency virus, tuberculosis, and other diseases not yet known or identified.
"Uncle Fat" is a morbidly obese monkey in Thailand who gorged himself on junk food and soda that tourists had left behind. As the leader of his troop, this gluttonous monkey also had subordinate monkeys bringing him goodies.
Apes, gibbons, lemurs, and chimpanzees are not scientifically classified as monkeys. They are all primates, but, like humans, they have a different classification to monkeys.
An abandoned medical research facility called the New York Blood Center used wild chimpanzees in its vaccination research in the 1970s. When the research facility shut down in 2005, the 66 remaining chimps were set free on a small land mass soon dubbed "Monkey Island."
At the tip of a monkey's tail is a patch of bare skin that acts similar to a human's fingertips. It is sensitive to touch and also has tiny ridges that gives the tail a better grip.
In Hindu, Hanuman ("disfigured jaw") is a human-like monkey god who commanded a monkey army. Interestingly, women were not allowed to worship the monkey god.
Monkeys that live in Central and South America are called "New World monkeys." Monkeys that live in Africa and Asia are called "Old World monkeys."
Contrary to popular opinion, humans did not come from monkeys. Rather, humans and monkeys share a common ancestor 25-30 million years ago and then evolved from this animal in various different ways.
Old World Monkeys have narrow noses that point down, don't hang in trees, are larger, don't have prehensile tails, and have strange sitting pads on their bottoms. New World monkeys have flatter noses, live in trees, and have prehensile tails.
The female spider monkey has the longest tail of all the primates. Even though its body is only 2 feet long, its tail can reach 3 feet in length. Their tails can carry the the monkey's entire body weight and even pick up items as small as peanut.
Mandrill monkeys have fangs that are longer than a lion's fangs. They also have multi-colored bottoms which makes them easier to see in the leafy gloom of the forest.
The fastest primate on Earth is the patas monkey. It can reach speeds of 34 miles per hour (55 km/h).
The uakari is one of the rarest and most unusual-looking of all the New World monkeys. While it looks similar to an orangutan, its face is pink, which often turns bright red when the animal becomes excited or angry. It also makes a noise similar to a human laughing.
While monkeys and apes are related, they are very different from each other. Monkeys have tails, have snouts, and they are not as intelligent as apes. Additionally, apes are not found in North or South America or Europe, while monkeys are.
The owl monkey (night monkey) is the only nocturnal New World monkey. They are also one of the few monkey species affected by malaria, which means they have been used in non-human primate malaria experiments.
Africa's Namib Desert is home to the chacma baboons. One hardy chacma baboon troop survived 116 days without water in the desert by eating figs.
The only wild monkey in Europe is the tailless Barbary macaque, which is found in parts of Northern Africa and the British territory of Gibraltar.
The first primate in space was a rhesus macaque named Albert. On June 14, 1949, Albert was sent into space to test the effects of space travel on a body. While he survived the flight, he died when the rocket parachute failed.
The Japanese macaque is the northernmost monkey and is capable of living in more than 3 feet of snow in as temperatures as low as 5 degrees Fahrenheit (-15 degrees Celsius).
The largest monkey in the world is the male mandrill. It is almost 1 meter (3.3 feet) long and weighs about 35 kilograms (77 pounds).
The ancient Egyptians considered the Hamadryas Baboon to be sacred. One of their gods, Thoth was regularly drawn as a man with the head of this baboon.
The monkey is the 9th animal in the Chinese zodiac. People born in a year of the monkey are supposedly intelligent, lively, and creative, but might also be selfish and impatient.
The capuchin monkey is the most common and the most intelligent of the New World monkeys.
The spider monkey is the most acrobatic of the New World monkeys, and it has been know to leap across gaps as large as 35 feet.
Monkeys are found almost everywhere on Earth, except for Australia and Antarctica.
The Diana monkey was named for the Roman goddess of hunting because the stripe on its forehead resembles Diana bow.
The male howler monkey has the loudest call of any other primate and is one of the loudest animals in the world. Interestingly, the louder the howler monkey, the smaller its testicles and the lower its sperm count
Capuchin monkeys are named after the 16th-century monks because the monkey's hair resembles the monks' hooded robes.
Monkeys are long-lived, surviving in the wild anywhere between 10 and 50 years.
Ethiopian geladas form the largest monkey troops in the world, numbering from 350 to 650 individuals.
Baboons have a "language" of more than 30 sounds. They communicate through actions such as shrugging and lip smacking, too.
Picking out parasites and dirts from each others' furs is a way for monkeys to communicate, form social hierarchies, and strengthen family and friendship bonds.
Found only in the Chinese province of Yunnan, the black snub-nosed monkey lives at the higest altitudes, near 15,000 feet  (4,572 m) of any primate.
A group of monkeys is variously called a troop, barrel, carload, cartload, or tribe."
To identify themselves more easily, squirrel monkeys will smear food on their tails, much like how humans may wear name tags.
Due to the loss of trees in their native habitat, only about 1,500 golden lion tamarins exist in the wild.
Each year, about 55,000 primates are used as test animals in the U.S., and about 10,000 are used in Great Britain. Japan uses millions of primates.
When researchers offered the Japanese macaque sweet potatoes during research in the 1940s, the monkeys didn't like the taste of the dirt on the veggies, so they washed it off. Now, generations later, washing food has become a learned behavior. No other monkeys in the world are known to wash their food before eating.
HIV was created in the stomach of a chimp who had eaten two different types of monkeys that had two different viruses.  The two viruses combined to form a hybrid virus, which then spread through the chimp species, and then later was transmitted to humans.
White-faced capuchin monkeys rub their fur with the Giant African Millipedes, which acts as a form of insect repellent.
On the Yakushima island Japan, monkeys groom and share food with deer in exchange for a ride.
After weeks of training, rhesus monkeys learned to recognize themselves in a mirror. The first thing they did was to promptly examined their genitals, every intimate nook and cranny.
The "Monkey Orchid" is a flower that has evolved to look like the grinning face of a monkey. Ironically, instead of smelling like bananas, it smells like a ripe orange.
Alexander I, the king of Greece, died from sepsis after being bit by one of his pet monkeys. His death led to a war that killed over 100,000 people.
A recently discovered monkey, the Burmese sneezing monkey, sneezes whenever it rains.
A group of 15 captive monkeys at a primate research institute in Japan used tree branches to fling themselves over a high voltage electric fence. They were later lured back to the research center with peanuts.
To prove that children need a mother's love, scientist Harry Harlow subjected baby monkeys to horrific experiments in what was called the "The Pit of Despair" in which he isolated and tortured baby monkeys.
The mustached emperor tamarin is believed to have been named for German Emperor Wilhelm II. Both have impressive mustaches.
French surgeon Serge Voronoff (1866-1951) gained notoriety when he grafted monkey testicles into the the scrotum of human patients in an attempt to cure infertility and increase their sex drive.
A 22-year-old primate researcher at Emory died after a rhesus monkey infected with the herpes B virus threw a tiny drop of fluid, mostly likely from  urine or feces, at her face as she was transporting the animal.
Italian Professor Sergio Canavero claimed to have conducted the first monkey head transplant without any neurological injury to the animal. However, he did not connect the spinal cord, so the monkey was completely paralyzed. It was only kept alive for only 20 hours after the procedure for ethical reasons.
The scientific name for a gorilla is Gorilla gorilla gorilla.